Task 1: What is Redux and When to Use It
What is Redux?

Redux is a predictable state container for JavaScript applications. It is commonly used with React to manage application state in a centralized and structured way.

In simple words, Redux helps you store all important shared data of your application in one central place, called the store. Instead of passing data manually from one component to another through props, components can directly read data from the Redux store and send updates through actions.

Redux is very useful in large-scale applications where many components need to access and update the same data. For example, in an Employee Management System:

employee list may be used in multiple screens
user login status may be needed everywhere
theme state may affect the whole UI
loading indicators may be controlled globally

Redux makes such state handling organized, scalable, and easier to debug.

Why Redux is called a predictable state container

Redux follows strict rules:

state is stored in one central store
state cannot be changed directly
changes happen only through actions
reducers decide how state should update

Because of this fixed pattern, state updates become predictable. If you know the current state and the action being dispatched, you can determine the next state.

When should Redux be used?

Redux is useful when:

the application is large
many components need shared global state
state logic is becoming hard to manage
prop drilling is becoming messy
debugging state updates is difficult
the app has authentication, dashboards, forms, APIs, filters, loaders, themes, etc.

For this Employee Management Dashboard, Redux is a good choice because the app contains:

employee CRUD operations
authentication state
global UI state like theme and loading

All of these are shared states, so centralized management is helpful.

When NOT to use Redux

Redux should not be used in every application.

You may avoid Redux when:

the app is small
state is simple
state is local to one or two components
Context API or useState is enough
adding Redux makes the project unnecessarily complex

For example, if your app only has a small form, a counter, or a simple to-do list, Redux may be overkill.

Task 2: Store, Actions, Reducers

Redux is built around three important concepts:

Store
Actions
Reducers

Let us understand each one in detail.

1. Store

The store is the central place where the entire application state lives.

It is called the single source of truth because all shared state is stored in one object.

For example, in this project, the store may contain:

list of employees
logged-in user info
theme mode
loading status

The store allows components to:

read the current state
dispatch actions to update the state
Why store is important

Without a store, data would be scattered in multiple components. Managing it would become confusing. With Redux, the store keeps everything centralized.

Example
{
  auth: {
    isAuthenticated: true,
    user: { username: "admin" }
  },
  employees: {
    employees: [...]
  },
  ui: {
    theme: "light",
    loading: false
  }
}
2. Actions

An action is a plain JavaScript object that describes what happened.

It does not change the state directly. It only tells Redux that some event occurred.

An action usually has:

type → tells what kind of action it is
payload → optional data needed for the update
Example
{
  type: "employees/addEmployee",
  payload: {
    id: 1,
    name: "Rahul",
    department: "IT"
  }
}

Here:

type says an employee should be added
payload contains employee data
Why actions are important

Actions make state changes explicit. Instead of silently changing state, Redux says: “Tell me what happened first.”

This makes the application easier to understand and debug.

3. Reducers

A reducer is a function that decides how state should change based on the action received.

It takes two things:

current state
action

And returns:

new updated state
Basic reducer syntax
function reducer(state, action) {
  switch (action.type) {
    case "someAction":
      return updatedState;
    default:
      return state;
  }
}
Why reducers are important

Reducers contain the actual logic of state updates. They are responsible for handling actions properly and returning the next state.

For example:

add employee
edit employee
delete employee
login
logout
toggle theme

All these can be handled by reducers.

Task 3: Immutable State Principle
What is immutability?

Immutability means not changing the original state directly. Instead of modifying the existing object or array, we create a new updated copy.

Why state should not be mutated in Redux

Redux depends on immutability because it needs to detect whether state has changed or not.

If you directly mutate state, Redux may not properly detect updates, and the UI may not re-render correctly.

Direct mutation can also cause:

bugs that are hard to track
unexpected side effects
difficulty in debugging
broken time-travel debugging
unpredictable application behavior
Wrong way
state.employees.push(newEmployee);

This directly changes the existing array.

Correct way
return {
  ...state,
  employees: [...state.employees, newEmployee]
};

This creates a new array.

Why immutability is important in Redux

Immutability helps Redux:

compare old state and new state efficiently
detect changes quickly
re-render UI correctly
keep state predictable
avoid accidental data corruption
Redux Toolkit and immutability

Redux Toolkit uses Immer internally, which lets us write code that looks like mutation, but actually creates immutable updates safely behind the scenes.

Example:

state.employees.push(action.payload);

This looks like mutation, but in Redux Toolkit it is handled safely.

Conclusion

Immutability is a core principle of Redux because it ensures reliable updates, predictable state management, and better debugging.

Task 4: Redux Data Flow Cycle

Redux follows a one-way data flow. This means data always moves in one direction, making the application easier to understand.

Redux Data Flow Steps
1. Component dispatches an action

A React component triggers an event, such as clicking a button.

Example:

user clicks “Add Employee”
component dispatches addEmployee() action
2. Action goes to reducer

The dispatched action is sent to the reducer.

3. Reducer updates state

The reducer checks the action type and updates the state accordingly.

4. Store gets updated

Redux saves the new updated state inside the store.

5. UI re-renders

Components subscribed to the store receive the updated state and re-render automatically.

Example Flow

Suppose the user adds a new employee:

component dispatches addEmployee(employeeData)
reducer receives the action
reducer adds new employee to the list
store updates the employees state
employee list component re-renders with the new employee
Why one-way flow is useful

It makes the application:

easier to debug
more predictable
easier to test
simpler to maintain in large projects

Task 5: Small Reducer Example

Here is a simple reducer example for employee management:

const initialState = {
  employees: []
};

function employeeReducer(state = initialState, action) {
  switch (action.type) {
    case "ADD_EMPLOYEE":
      return {
        ...state,
        employees: [...state.employees, action.payload]
      };

    case "DELETE_EMPLOYEE":
      return {
        ...state,
        employees: state.employees.filter(emp => emp.id !== action.payload)
      };

    default:
      return state;
  }
}
Explanation
initial state contains an empty employee array
when ADD_EMPLOYEE action is dispatched, new employee is added
when DELETE_EMPLOYEE action is dispatched, matching employee is removed
reducer returns a new state object each time

This is the basic idea of how reducers work.